If you look at back at the history of of
not just BHP, big companies in the
sector, one of the lessons is that when
a company gets boxed into a corner where
it has to pursue M&A, that leads to to
all sorts of untold
problems. I know how bad things can get
when people chase after something, or if
you get worried that failing or being
rejected on a transaction becomes a a
reputational issue, you end up in very
deep water then and and and can cause
yourself all sorts of problems.
>> I'm Francine Lacqua and this is Leaders,
the podcast that explores what drives
the world's most influential people.
This week's guest is Mike [music] Henry,
the outgoing chief executive of BHP, the
world's largest mining company. It's a
pivotal moment for the industry. Now,
global [music] demand for critical
minerals, driven by the energy
transition and the AI boom, is soaring.
And major producers like BHP are finding
it challenging to keep up.
>> [music]
>> Mike Henry has led the company through a
particularly active and transformative
period, spinning off its petroleum
business, collapsing its dual-listed
structure, and giving the green light to
the vast Jansen potash project in
Canada. We spoke in January before he
announced he would step down about
leading a mining giant at such a
consequential time,
>> [music]
>> what it's like when big acquisitions
don't go your way, and how he's thinking
about succession.
>> [music]
>> Mike Henry, thank you so much for
speaking to Bloomberg.
>> Thanks for seeing us. Great to be here.
>> We're in a peculiar moment uh for the
industry because so so much is changing.
Do you feel like you're in a different
moment?
>> A different, but good different. But
I've spent my whole career in resources.
And for most of that time, nobody really
wanted to talk to miners. You you know,
it was a it was it was not seen as being
an industry of of of of today, perhaps.
But what we've seen over the past three
or four years is this awakening to the
importance of metals and minerals. You
know, you've got policy makers now
trying to figure out how do they go
about securing critical mineral supply
chain resilience. Is there going to be
enough copper? How do they go about
facilitating that? And so, mining has
gone from a backburner industry to now
being front and center of some of the
big conversations that are happening
globally.
>> But how do you respond to being in this
moment? Is it a lot of pressure? Do you
feel responsibility or is it only with
hindsight that you realize how how
crucial this period will be?
>> No, no, no. So, so, I I and others
definitely recognize how crucial this
this period is.
And
to these to the extent there's I feel
pressure, it's well more than offset by
the opportunity. If you look at copper,
for example, copper demand is going to
almost double over the next 25 years
because it's needed for the broader
economy, it's needed for the energy
transition, the AI revolution. And yet,
copper's becoming harder and harder to
find it. People are now cottoning on to
that and they're saying, well, wow, if
we don't do anything, we're going to see
super high copper prices and shortages
at at at given times. And so, the policy
makers now weighing in with industry to
figure out How do we go about securing
That's not what happens. Can you tell me
>> about a meeting where where you felt all
of that, you know, coming together?
>> A fellow CEO and myself were called into
the Oval Office to meet with the
president and and the Secretary of
Interior, Secretary Burham, because we
have a specific copper project that
we're trying to develop in the US. This
project could supply 25% of the US's
copper demand for decades to come.
Having that level of attention on our
sector, that level of of of support and
some what that symbolizes then for for
for other governments
has been
such a a big difference from where we
were a few years ago. And it creates
yes, it creates uncertainty, pressures
at times, but big picture, this is a net
positive for the for the sector.
>> Mike, tell me a little bit about how you
transformed BHP.
>> First of all, I've been with BHP since
2003. Became CEO right at the beginning
of 2020. And and and within 3 months we
were into the middle of of COVID. And
so, you know, you were asking earlier
about whether I feel pressure. The
pressure of today
is nothing compared to the pressure of
of the big decisions that we all needed
to take in the face of the uncertainties
that COVID brought. But as the impact I
and the team have had on the
organization over the past six plus
years, we've reshaped the BHP portfolio.
So, at the time we had about 80% of our
EBITDA being generated by combination of
oil and gas, thermal coal, coking coal,
and iron ore, so steel-making raw
materials. In a world where over the
long arc of time, we should expect the
world to decarbonize, and we're going to
see peak steel
beyond which we'll start to see the iron
ore market shrink. So, we we needed to
make sure that we had a portfolio that
was fit for the future. We've spun out
our oil and gas division. We've halved
the size of our coal portfolio now only
focus on the best coals for
steel-making.
>> You changed the listing.
>> We changed we we collapsed the listing
into one. We had a bit of a funny
structure. It was called a dual-listed
company, two primary listings, two head
offices, and so on. Collapsed that. That
was a big value unlock for for for
shareholders. And we've grown markedly
in copper and potash. We've grown copper
by 30% over the past three years. We're
the world's largest copper producer. In
addition to that, we've improved
operational excellence. We've gone from
being a laggard in the sector to being
best in class in from from an
operational perspective.
>> Jansen, right? I mean, you know, did you
feel the the need to go at speed, who
you were listening to? Did was it your
gut or other people?
>> I've learned actually to rely more on
gut over time, but these were all very
well thought through. You don't trigger
a, you know,
an investment decision the size of
Jansen on gut alone. And
>> feel the need to do it in one year? So,
when you
I'm often told that actually when you
become chief executive, you have a short
amount of time to make a big difference
that people will accept because then it
gets lost.
>> So, I've never been one to coast in in
in my career, whatever role I've gone
into. You you bring You have to bring
energy to it. I also believe that,
coming back to your point, that there's
never a better time to drive change when
everything's up in the air a little bit.
I had a very clear view of what was
going to help drive value for the
company over the next 20 or 30 years. We
were then able to trigger a series of
decisions actually on the same day. We
announced that we were collapsing the
corporate structure, we were spinning
out our oil and gas division, we were
selling down parts of our coal
portfolio, and we were investing in
Jansen. The first phase alone, biggest
ever capital project for BHP.
>> Mike, a lot of shareholders could have
pushed back against these individually,
but by the fact that you bundled them
>> Yes.
>> it made it like everything was like,
"Okay." Is it Was that a strategy to
communicate at the same time?
>> We knew all of the things that we wanted
to do, but I also we also believe that
by being clear with the market,
particularly around the spin out of oil
and gas and the investment into potash,
that we could make it clear to our
shareholders how we were thinking about
the shaping of the portfolio and why one
decision
needed to be seen in tandem with the
with the with the other decision, for
sure.
>> Is that how you get your nickname,
Meticulous Mike?
>> [laughter]
>> So, sometimes your your your reputation
outgrows you. You know, I am somebody
who pays attention to detail, high sense
of accountability, and uh I think maybe
that's what sits behind the the uh the
moniker.
>> Do you think when we talk about this new
world order, is it being overstated or
understated?
>> Well, I I certainly don't think it's
being um
understated. So, things are definitely
more uncertain um and more
volatile. So, it it's worth pointing out
that in terms of our sector, the
decisions that we take, these are 10,
20, 30-year decisions. And over that
time horizon, we know for sure that
demand for some commodities is going to
increase, and that then informs our
selection about which commodities we
want to be involved in. Now,
how you operate in that environment, of
course, that's informed by all the
turmoil that we see in the world around
us.
>> Can you talk to me about how difficult
it is that it's to make decisions where
you actually don't know where this new
world order ends up?
>> Look, it it it's increased the need for
us to be planning through scenarios. So,
rather than trying to predict a specific
individual future outcome in 20 years'
time,
um we've, you know, continued to
reinforce our ability to uh develop
different scenarios that we then test
our decisions against. And one of the
things that will allow us to be
successful is making decisions that are
as resilient as possible under a range
of different uh scenarios. It is an
added complexity, uh you know, creates
higher stakes in some instances to the
decisions we take, um but this is the
world that we have. And as I said
earlier, on a kind of net basis, this is
a real opportunity for the for the
sector.
>> The mining industry is in a major
consolidation phase with many players
pursuing M&A to beef up their metals
portfolios. While BHP is no different,
their success has been mixed. [music]
Mike Henry tried and failed twice to
acquire Anglo American. Not only did
they say no, but the British mining
company's teaming up with BHP [music]
rival Teck. Now, with all of this
happening in the public arena, I wanted
to know how Henry handled the bid,
whether he had any regrets,
>> [music]
>> and how he stays focused in the face of
rejection. You tried to buy Anglo
American twice.
>> We did, yes.
>> But failed. What did you learn from
those failures?
>> So, you why why did we pursue Anglo
American in the first place? It's
because we like copper. We've grown in
copper over by 30%. We've developed fig
four big internal copper growth options.
But we're BHP. We have the ability to do
even more.
Uh we thought that there was a great
opportunity to unlock value for both
sets of shareholders through bringing
the the the two companies together. It
wasn't to be the first time around. Uh
second time around, we were faced with a
decision of well, we of course, for all
the same reasons as we went at we we we
engaged at the first time around,
um do we re-approach, see if there's any
more interest in that was given that
they had progressed some of their
strategy, or do we hang back for fear of
of being told no again?
I would back us any day of the week to
do the bold thing, which is to to
re-approach. And in both times, we
showed discipline. I know how bad things
can get when people chase after
something
>> Money-wise. Like that you just want
something so badly that you're prepared
to to buy at any price.
>> get worried that, you know, failing or
being rejected on a transaction becomes
a a reputational issue, you end up in
very deep water then and and and can
cause yourself all sorts of problems. Um
so, we went into both approaches with a
clear sense of we will only do something
that we believe creates value for PHP
shareholders. And if we can't say see
that, then we'll we'll step away.
>> How did it feel like at the time?
>> You approach those things with a with a
sense of of optimism, a sense of of uh
of pressure. Um but coming away from it,
you know,
momentary disappointment, but but
alongside that, the confidence that
we've done the right thing by way of of
uh of shareholders and you know,
confident we've made the right decision.
>> How did you manage through it? So, you
still have staff that you need to speak
to, morale that you need to boost or at
least keep steady.
>> We've got such a professional team, and
so it's [clears throat] perhaps a little
bit less disruptive inside than a than
people might think looking looking
outside in. People are very clear that
uh they like the boldness. So, the fact
that, you know, BHP is willing to back
itself and go after opportunities when
when it when it spots them, that's
motivating for people. They also like
the fact that we are super disciplined
and that we're confident enough in
ourselves and our our existing strategy
and our internal growth options to back
away
if we don't think that we can create
value for for shareholders.
>> How much time do you have to spend on
that? So, was it all consuming?
>> No, unfortunately, when you run when you
run a uh a a a business like BHP, you
have to be able to walk and chew gum at
the same time. Now, I do have a a a team
that is very high-performing. These are
all big leaders in their own right. As
CEO, I don't need to spend a large
proportion of my time getting in and and
and solving day-to-day business
problems. The business is running so
smoothly, and when problems do arise,
the team's on it on on on on I continue
to need to tend to other relationships
outside of that particular focus. So, it
increases in the amount of time that you
have to take, but it can't become all
consuming for the for the the CEO.
>> After the the first bid that didn't go
through, did you already know that you'd
you'd go after it a second time if if
the opportunity was there?
>> No, not at not not at all. In in in
fact, the um
the board and I have been very very
deliberate about crafting a BHP strategy
and that would never be dependent on
M&A. If you look at back at the history
of of not just BHP, big companies in the
sector, uh
you know, the one of the lessons is that
when a company gets
boxed into a corner where it has to
pursue M&A,
the you you that that that that leads to
to all sorts of untold uh uh problems.
And so, we've been very deliberate about
saying first and foremost, we have to be
able to get more out of the resources
that we have. And that then enables us
to be quite discretionary about uh
whether we want to pursue an
opportunity. So, when we back to where
the first time, we said,
our prime focus is is this. When we
approached spotted a further opportunity
or where the question arose for whether
we should we should approach again, it
was the same attitude. We don't have to,
but because we believe there's value to
be created for shareholders, it's almost
incumbent on us
to make an approach. And if you know, if
if if there's not a meeting of minds,
then fine. We know we've got a great
strategy in our own right, great growth
ahead of us in the right commodities, so
we'll stay focused on that.
>> Do you think there was a way of getting
it? I don't know whether soft power you
know, the critics say that actually had
you spent more time you didn't want the
South African operations, right, of
Anglo, but had you spent more time in
reassuring them or or spending more time
with the Australian shareholders, maybe
something could have moved more in your
direction. Is that fair criticism?
>> We will never know. Um the I'm very
comfortable with the way that we
attempted the original structure. If we
had have structured it differently,
would that have made a difference?
Maybe, but that would have run up
against
the main objective here, which is to
create value for BHP shareholders. So I
I don't have any regrets over having
approached the way we approached the
first time around or the
second time time around.
>> What's the right way of approaching
these some of these transformational
deals? You have to have like a clear
strategy and
I don't know how you would describe it.
>> So you you we have to be very clear
clear thinking. And and if you think
about the Anglo deal, it was wholly
consistent with the strategy that we had
laid out as a as as as a company.
The commodity that we wanted to grow in,
how we thought about
M&A, the sort of assets that we were
willing to acquire. Where you get into
trouble is if you're not clear on what
your strategy is or you start chasing
after a deal to get a deal done or
because you don't have all all all
alternatives.
>> So you almost have to set that strategy
in the as soon as you take over.
>> You don't want to be setting strategy in
the middle of a transaction, that's for
sure.
>> Do some chief executives change
strategy? Do you think Why do you think
that is?
>> Well, when a business isn't performing
well or when the world is changing
um
in a way that that demands a rethinking
of of of strategy, of course then a CEO
should get in and and and rethink it.
But with ours, you know, we remain
confident in the strategy that we we we
have and in the commodities that we've
chosen.
>> That's bold. Isn't it? It's kind of like
sticking sticking to a strategy.
>> have to you have to be bold in these
roles. It's um
kind of an informed boldness. Our sector
is such a dynamic important sector
that if you're not bold, that's where
companies go off course or they they
fall um
they they fail over time.
Um and so when I stepped into role, I
told myself I needed to be bold.
>> But I also like the fact that it's no
regrets. Because otherwise you could
procrastinate about things that you
could have done differently or you
should have done.
>> So so we faced I mean this was a key key
point that we faced in in the second
approach to to Anglo. You know, some
people would would would say well, do
you really want that to be seen in
public and again the second time around?
Of course you don't want it. But when
faced with that choice of well, do we
take that on,
but do what we believe is right by
shareholders by by by re-approaching and
and have that level of boldness and
confidence, or do we stay away from it
because you know, for for fear of of of
of it looking like another failure? We
back ourselves.
>> I mean, industry rivals or industry
players are now actually coming
together. If you were to be number two
mining company in the world instead of
number one, does that make a difference?
>> Makes no difference whatsoever. It's uh
you know, I I don't worry at all about
losing the bragging rights of being the
the the biggest miner by market
capitalization. Um both because I don't
it doesn't actually lead to greater
shareholder value in my view, but
secondly, I know that the minute that we
get into a headspace that says we have
to chase something just to be number
one,
that's where things become much much
riskier. It's never a good idea to
pursue a transaction because somebody
else is pursuing a transaction.
>> When I spoke to Mike Henry in January,
there had been rumors circling that
after 6 years, he was preparing to step
down. Since speaking, those rumors
proved to be true and he plans to hand
over the reins on July the 1st.
Knowing that his departure could be
soon, I wanted [music] to hear more
about how he handles the day-to-day
while also preparing for succession.
What do you hope your successor can can
learn from the last 6 years?
>> My successor is going to have the
opportunity to learn from all of the
work both of my time in role as well as
from from the long arc of of BHP's
history.
>> I imagine it's difficult, right?
Thinking about succession. One of the
most important roles for a chief
executive is is to make sure that you
think about succession, but also it's
difficult to figure out the the time to
go.
>> Well, so so interestingly, day one,
literally day one
as in when the board made the decision
to appoint me into the CEO role, my
chair at the time sat down with me and
said,
"Succession starts now."
And it was made super clear to me that
one of my biggest accountabilities was
developing that next generation of of of
leaders. So, that's always been front
and center for me.
>> It's hard though. Is it hard?
>> course it's hard. And in particular if
you become complacent and take your eye
off the ball.
And you don't continue to invest in in
in in in people and giving them
you know, different roles, expanding
roles. And if you're not providing them
with the right support. And you know,
the other party you questions with
friends here was what's the right time
to to go? If you have the luxury of
making that decision on your own.
Because there's plenty of CEOs who don't
make the decision.
It's always hard. It's it's you I'm sure
when that day comes it'll be a
combination of personal
perspective but also what we believe is
right for business. I love BHP. I know
that there will come a time where fresh
energy, perspective and so on will also
be a positive for the organization. I'm
a big believer in in in in renewal. And
that applies to to companies just like
it does ourselves.
>> When you talk to other chief executives,
do you does succession come up?
>> So, it comes up more regularly than some
people would think. You know, in terms
of in some cases it's been their own
succession. So, as they're leaving role,
I always like to get their reflections
on things as you have new CEOs taking up
the role. So, for example, when I first
was appointed CEO, one of the very
gratifying
things that I hadn't recognized was it
was the case was a lot of other CEOs
reached out and and provided a bit of
coaching or said welcome to the club and
you know, we've all been through this
experience. If there's anything we can
ever we can help you with. And I try to
do that with with with others as as
well. I've had discussions on
succession. Sometimes prompted by me,
sometimes prompted by them about the
topic or the concept of succession, how
we go about building capability in BHP
with CEOs from many other industries.
>> So, what's the guiding thought on
leadership? When I mean, if somebody
were to to be appointed chief executive
today and you call them, what do you
tell them?
>> It [clears throat] would of course be
around some of the things that we
discussed about being clear on strategy,
aligned with board, um keeping your
strategy consistent, don't get blown off
course.
But I think most people stepping into
the CEO role would know that. Um what I
think sometimes CEOs can you know, would
would would be at risk of missing is
the importance to long-term success of
how you go about engaging and enabling
your people.
And and this and and doing so in a way
that isn't reliant upon the CEO of the
day or the management team of the day
embedding in the company's DNA and a pro
a culture and an approach to how you go
about leading your people, enabling your
people that stands the test of of of
time because over a long enough time
horizon, the incremental value, the
incremental reliability which builds
trust with shareholders and other
stakeholders
the value of that over time is certainly
well in excess of the value that you're
ever going to get through developing an
individual mine or undertaking an
individual M&A transaction.
>> What's been the most unexpected or
surprising thing about leading the
company?
>> Well, probably a couple of things. One
of course,
nobody knew that we were going to to
encounter COVID early on in my CEO-ship.
So that certainly falls into the
unexpected category. [laughter]
Other unexpected things have been just
how rapidly, as somebody who's spent
many, many years out there talking about
the importance of metals and minerals,
sometimes feeling like like our advocacy
was falling on deaf ears, to see how
quickly the world has pivoted on this
issue and how this is now much better
understood.
>> You've also put a stop to pointless
meetings. Was there a pointless
[laughter] meeting where you said enough
is enough, I need to change this?
>> Well, this is
there's there's probably been a lifelong
passion of mine.
>> [laughter]
>> So I recognize how valuable time is. We
say to people that we want to engage
them better to make sure that their work
is meaningful, that their time is better
allocated, and that day-to-day they're
able to pursue improvement. It should be
no different for senior management. We
have to have impactful meetings. And
that means not holding meetings that we
don't need to have, not having people in
the meetings who don't need to be there
because that's disrespectful to their
time. And then for the people that are
there, we have to ensure that the
meeting is as efficient and impactful as
possible. And so we have very clearly
set out requirements around meeting
objectives, meeting preparation. You
want everybody showing up to the meeting
having done the reading, well informed,
able to bring their view to the table.
And then we put in place a continuous
improvement process around that where I
get feedback on whether I've done a good
job or a bad job or I've fallen short in
my chairing of that process so I can
then improve.
>> One of the big debates right now is that
do do you tolerate tempers in people
around you in a business world because
it means passion or is it something that
is not tolerated?
>> Uh temper, if you if you mean somebody
banging on the table and throwing
objects, clearly not tolerated. Should
people be transparent about you know,
when others have fallen short or or or
when they uh believe that others aren't
upholding the values of the organization
and so on? Yes, and sometimes there'll
be a sharp edge to that, but only to a
point. But you can't have an effective
high-performing company if people are
always shying away from being clear
about their views on performance and so
on for fear of being seen to be too
passionate on issues. So it's a
difficult one Francine to answer in a
black and white fashion. Certainly, you
know, the disrespectful behaviors no
tolerance for that whatsoever. But being
clear with people, "Look, I don't accept
this level of performance. There has to
be space for for that."
>> What do you think defines bad
leadership?
>> Lack of listening. You know, there's
this quandary for leaders in that you
get into these leadership positions
because you've got, you know, a certain
ability to absorb information, make
decisions, a certain level of boldness.
Carried to the extreme
that can result in arrogance,
overconfidence, which will then lead to
poor decisions at some point. You know,
there might be a series of great
decisions, but if a leader is always
just making decisions on their own, not
listening to others, at some point they
won't have the benefit of either the
checks and balances that come through
listening to others or the improvement
of decisions through gaining perspective
of others. That's a very dangerous space
to be. So, leaders that don't respect
their people,
who are overconfident and don't really
listen and invite challenge, that's
certainly not going to lead to the best
possible
leadership.
>> Mike Henry, thank you so much for
joining us.
>> Thank you, Francine.